\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@c @setfilename 
@settitle COMPILER-MACRO
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c Version and Contact Info
@set AUTHOR Bike
@c %**end of header
@finalout
@c @setcontentsaftertitlepage
@c @titlepage
@c @title README
@c @author Bike
@c @c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@c @page
@c @vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @insertcopying
@c @end titlepage

@include include/sb-texinfo.texinfo

@node Top
@top Introduction
@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.

This library is intended to make it possible to make compiler macros much
more useful, by granting them access to lexical type information, making
the protocol for declining expansion more convenient, and establishing some
information for signaling optimization advice to programmers. 
Some utilities to support this, especially for reasoning on types, are
also included.

All symbols are available from the @verb{~SANDALPHON.COMPILER-MACRO~} package.

@c @contents
@menu
* Motivation::                  
* API::
* Function Index::
* Type Index::
@end menu

@node Motivation
@chapter Motivation

Writing macros for syntactic extensions is an integral part of Lisp
systems, and is strongly supported by Lisp's homoiconicity.  However, at
least in Common Lisp, another kind of code transform is not so utilized:
those for optimization, i.e. source-to-source transforms.  There's no
particular reason for these to be exclusively the domain of an opaque
compiler system, any more than syntax is.

To support this, Common Lisp has compiler macros (@verb{~define-compiler-macro~},
@verb{~compiler-macro-function~}), which are intended as optimization advice to
compilers.  Practically speaking compiler macros are like macros, but can
be defined on symbols that exist as functions or macros (so as to separate
the core logic for such functions from optimization advice on them), and
can decline to expand (if an optimization is not applicable).

Compiler macros are, however, not that useful on their own.  Most compiler
macros rely on picking out literal arguments to functions (via @verb{~constantp~})
for a sort of partial inlining.  As there are no standard facilities for
complicated program analysis or, importantly, accessing information that
may be being used by the compiler anyway (e.g. @verb{~OPTIMIZE~} information, type
declarations), this is about the best they can do.

It's also not possible to define multiple compiler macros on a function, so
either a wrapper around @verb{~define-compiler-macro~} etc. must be provided, or
all possible optimizations must be crammed into one compiler macro.

@section FORM-TYPE
To support more involved optimization possibilities, this library includes
a @verb{~FORM-TYPE~} function for analyzing the possible type of a form.

Minimal lexical type information extraction is also supported, even if
declarations are not implementationally available.  This means, for
example, that @verb{~(form-type '(the string foo))~} will be STRING. 
This mechanism is customizable.

Utilities for working with types directly, e.g. extracting bounds from
scalar numeric types, are provided.

@section Policy as Optimizations Conditional

@verb{~POLICY~} and @verb{~POLICY-QUALITY~} for optimizations conditional on programmer
wants.  If possible, implementation-specific hooks are used to access
declaration information in environments; otherwise policy is considered
neutral, and all variables are considered of type @verb{~T~}, etc.

@section NOTE-OPTIMIZATION-FAILURE

Compiler maros can note optimization information to programmers (that is,
at compile time) with @verb{~NOTE-OPTIMIZATION-FAILURE~}.  A tree of condition
types is supported so that these conditions may be subclassed,
muffled, etc.

@section Hints, Decline, Abort

A simple mechanism for defining multiple compiler macro functions, called
"hints", is included (@verb{~DEFINE-COMPILER-HINT~}, @verb{~DEFINE-COMPILER-HINTER~},
@verb{~COMPILER-HINT~}).  Each hint has a "qualifier", an unevaluated object
compared with @verb{~CL:EQUAL~}, for establishing uniqueness etc.  Hints can give
up on expansion with the function @verb{~DECLINE-EXPANSION~}, or abort expansion
entirely (e.g. if a form is invalid) with @verb{~ABORT-EXPANSION~}; with the same
call they may provide optimization notes.

More involved custom mechanisms may be defined, that still use
@verb{~DECLINE-EXPANSION~} etc., with the macros @verb{~WITH-EXPANSION-DECLINATION~} and
@verb{~WITH-EXPANSION-ABORTION~}.  Something with similar syntax to CLOS is
planned, if this library gets users.

Finally, so that the results of optimizations can be seen easily,
@verb{~COMPILER-MACROEXPAND~} and @verb{~COMPILER-MACROEXPAND-1~} are trivially defined. 
They are analogous to @verb{~CL:MACROEXPAND~} and @verb{~CL:MACROEXPAND-1~}.

@section Implementation support

Presently CCL and SBCL are supported.  Any other conforming CL
implementation should work as well, but information will not be available
from the environment.  Hope you like THE.

Implementation-specific hooks are exported from the
SANDALPHON.COMPILER-MACRO-BACKEND package.  Functions needed are
VARIABLE-TYPE, FUNCTION-TYPE, PARSE-MACRO (as in CLtL2),
PARSE-COMPILER-MACRO (simple), POLICY, POLICY-QUALITY (for policy
information), and TYPEXPAND/-1 (for type utilities).

@section Documentation

For more specific documentation, consult the docstrings; everything
exported and most of that not exported should be documented.

If people get to using this library, a real manual will be constructed.

@section Examples

An edit of pkhuong's TABASCO-SORT library for efficient inline sorts, and a
"port" of a bit of Cyrus Harmon's opticl, are in test/

@section Notes

Miscellaneous notes are collected in notes/

@c Emacs 24.3.1 (Org mode 8.2.5h)

@node API
@chapter API

@section Conditions

@include include/condition-sandalphon.compiler-macro-compiler-macro-redefinition-warning.texinfo
@include include/condition-sandalphon.compiler-macro-optimization-note.texinfo
@include include/condition-sandalphon.compiler-macro-simple-optimization-note.texinfo

@section Functions
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-abort-expansion.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-array-type-dimensions.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-array-type-element-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-compiler-hint.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-compiler-macroexpand-1.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-compiler-macroexpand.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-complex-type-element-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-cons-type-car-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-cons-type-cdr-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-decline-expansion.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-eql-type-object.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-find-inferrer.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-form-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-form-typep.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-function-type-primary-value.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-function-type-return-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-intersection-type-types.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-kind-of.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-kindp.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-member-type-members.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-negation-type-type.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-note-optimization-failure.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-numeric-type-high.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-numeric-type-low.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-policy-quality.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-satisfies-type-function.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-setf-compiler-hint.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-setf-find-inferrer.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-union-type-types.texinfo
@include include/fun-sandalphon.compiler-macro-values-type-primary.texinfo

@section Macros
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-define-compiler-hint.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-define-compiler-hinter.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-define-inferrer.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-ekindcase.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-form-typecase.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-kindcase.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-policy.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-with-expansion-abortion.texinfo
@include include/macro-sandalphon.compiler-macro-with-expansion-declination.texinfo

@include include/short-backmatter.texinfo
@bye
